# Implementation and Evaluation of the First Prototype

## Implemented System

- Agent endpoint: `karabo-rag`
  - Based on [EuXFEL Karabo RAG project](https://git.xfel.eu/llm/karabo-rag) (private access)
  - Exposes a single API handler that a frontend can consume and that supports multi-turn conversations
  - Exposes another API to manage its RAG service
  - Does not provide internal, multi-agent workflows, including an agent loop.
- Agent frontend: [Jupyter AI v2](https://jupyter-ai.readthedocs.io/en/v2/)
  - Extension that we installed via `pip` on the remote Jupyter Lab server hosted on the EuXFEL HPC cluster
  - Is preconfigured to connect to the agent endpoint

## Quantitative Evaluation of the RAG Component via a Benchmark

- Date: 2026-03-19
- Chat model: gpt-5.4-mini-2026-03-17 (hosted by OpenAI)
- Embedding model: text-embedding-3-large (hosted by OpenAI)
- Evaluation dataset:
  - 80 coding-focused QA pairs about EXtra-data
  - Questions are in natural language, answers are mostly source code.
  - Generated by gpt-5.3-codex
  - Limitation: The quality of the dataset was not evaluated by EuXFEL staff.
- Benchmark results:
  - Retrieval performance:
    - Hit@k: 0.7500 (In 3 out of 4 queries, at least one relevant document is retrieved)
    - Precision@k: 0.5083 (About half of retrieved docs are irrelevant. Biggest issue!)
    - Recall@k: 0.6958 (Capturing most of the relevant information)
    - MRR: 0.6354 (Relevant documents tend to appear high in the ranking)
    - nDCG@k: 0.6215 (Some irrelevant docs are ranked too high)
    - Retriever is good at finding relevant info (recall), but not selective enough (precision).
  - Reasoning performance:
    - Citation rate: 1.0000
    - Error rate: 0.0000
    - Step limit rate 0.0000
    - Every LLM response succeeded, included citations, and had no truncation issues.
  - Endpoint performance:
    - Latency p50: 4510.10 ms
    - Latency p95: 6253.38 ms
    - Noticeable, but still acceptable delay for users
- Benchmark limitations:
  - We have not executed the semantic Ragas metrics, such as faithfulness, due to time constraints.
  - They can be part of the evaluation of the next prototype version.

## Qualitative Evaluation with EuXFEL Staff

- Date: 2025-03-19
- Setting: hybrid meeting with 12 data scientists of the EuXFEL Data Analysis group
- What are your first positive/negative thoughts on the demo? What would be important improvement potentials for the next prototype version?
  - Good: Jupyter AI interface is straightforward. Configure an EuXFEL persona and eventually add custom commands.
  - Good: The LLM responses in the side panel are formatted correctly with Markdown and code cells.
  - Negative: The LLM responses of the cell magic should be executable code cells with inline code comments instead of plain text output.
  - Negative: The LLM response should embed clickable URLs directly in the main response body, not just in the reference section.
  - Negative: Generated code contains many hallucinations, such as non-existing methods or attributes.
    - We should ingest the entire AST of the code together with the corresponding documentation comments and unit tests, and restrict the LLM to focus on the available data only.
    - We should ingest existing notebooks, e.g., from the users (be aware of potential copyright problems) and from the DA group).
    - We should run the LLM in agent mode **(Gen AI assistant vs. agentic AI system)**.
      - Add linting (Pylance, MyPy).
      - Add validation loop (generate, test, fix, re-run).
      - After the meeting, one of the meeting participants generated a notebook that contains an overview of every EXtra-data feature. They created it with Claude Opus, a short prompt, and a link to the public EXtra-data documentation. This creates the question if a RAG component is even necessary for modern agents with access to the internet.
- What was unclear to you (missing information/action, confusing label, etc.)?
  - Which additional context from the notebook is sent to the LLM together with the prompt? Does it differ for the side panel and the cell magic?
    - By default, just the last two prompts and responses.
    - This can be configured in the Jupyter AI settings.
    - The context should eventually include the entire notebook, other files, or the entire repository.
- Any further ideas or positive/negative feedback?
  - Check out **Grounded Docs**, an open-source MCP server as alternative to Context7, which can provide information from various documents (text, PDFs, code, etc.) and executes semantic chunking.
  - If the agent should be deployed on the HPC cluster:
    - Make sure it is sandboxed in a restricted environment. This could be enabled by **nono**, which uses Landlock. However, Landlock is apparently deactivated on the EuXFEL HPC.
    - Make sure that any code execution is approved by a human. An autonomously acting agent could consume a lot of capacity while working on flawed solutions.
